## Materials and methods

### Site description

Measurements were made at the *Soy*bean *F*ree-*A*ir *C*oncentration *E*nrichment (SoyFACE) experiment (40.04N, 88.23W; elev. 215 m; soyface.igb.illinois.edu), a 32-Ha experimental site near Urbana IL, USA. The site is flat, tile-drained, and has been cultivated for over 100 years. Soils are deep and highly productive, mapped as Flanagan silt loam (fine, smectitic, mesic Aquic Argiudoll) and Drummer silty clay loam  (fine-silty, mixed, superactive, mesic Typic Endoaquoll). The mean annual temperature is 11 °C, with monthly mean temperatures ranging from -3 °C in January to 24 °C in July, and annual precipitation is ~1 m, with approximately half falling during the May-September growing season [@Angel:2010vk].

The site was managed in a two-year rotation, with maize (*Zea mays* cv 34B43) and soybean (*Glycine max* cv 93B15) alternating between the eastern and western halves of the site. Maize was fertilized with 202 kg N Ha^-1^ yr^-1^ and soybean was not fertilized. The soil was typically chisel plowed each spring before planting, and in the fall after maize harvest but not after soybean. Measurements were taken from 2009-2011 in the west half of the site, where the crop rotation cycle for these years was soybean-maize-soybean. Management of these crops was consistent with previously reported practices at the site [@Leakey:2004iw; @Morgan:2005cz], with the exception that no fall tillage was done after the 2010 maize crop so that the heating equipment could be kept in operation overwinter.

### Elevated CO~2~ and temperature treatments

The field was divided into four experimental blocks, each containing two 20-m octagonal rings spaced 100 m apart to avoid cross-contamination by fumigation gases.
One ring in each block was maintained at ambient atmospheric conditions (approximately 390 ppm CO~2~), while the other was fumigated to a target of 585 ppm CO~2~ using *F*ree *A*ir *C*oncentration *E*nrichment (FACE) technology [@Miglietta:2001wm].
Elevated CO~2~ was maintained from dawn until dusk throughout the growing season.
The high-CO~2~ rings in the study area have been fumigated every growing season since 2001.

Starting in 2009, each ring was further split by imposing an elevated temperature treatment.
One 3-m hexagonal subplot of each ring was equipped with overhead infrared heaters as in Kimball [-@Kimball:2005lq].
The heaters were adjusted throughout the growing season to stay 1.4 m above the canopy and were controlled by infrared radiometers to maintain a difference of 3.5 °C between the canopy-top temperature of heated and unheated plots.
When rain was falling and when soil temperature was $\le$ 5 °C, heating was ineffective and heater output was therefore reduced to a minimum.
The heating system operated continuously between June 2009 and September 2011 except during planting when all equipment was removed to allow field tillage, during harvest when power cables were removed to allow harvester traffic, and during a two-week period in January 2010 when the equipment was rebuilt to repair damage from rodents.
Further details on the heating treatment are reported in [@RuizVera:2013we; @Rosenthal:2014di; @RuizVera:2015bv].

### Measurement of soil properties and CO~2~ efflux

CO~2~ efflux from soil was measured at three locations in each plot using 20-cm diameter collars made from PVC pipe.
At each location, one collar was inserted 3 cm into the soil to capture total soil respiration (R~tot~), and a second collar was inserted 25 cm to capture respiration by soil heterotrophs (R~het~) by excluding roots and rhizosphere:
The top 30 cm of soil contain at least 70% of soybean and 60% of maize root mass [@mayaki:1976mb; @AndersonTeixeira:2013bx], so this root-exclusion collar acts as a small trenched plot [@Vogel:2005do].
Collars were installed at crop emergence time each spring and left in place all year, then removed for field tillage just before the next year's planting. This annual reinstallation also eliminated several major limitations that apply to root-exclusion methods in untilled systems: it removed any accumulated difference in C or nutrient availability from previous years of root exclusion, and there was no need to correct for decomposition of roots severed during installation [@hanson:2000zr] because root biomass at installation was near zero.
Respiration by roots and rhizosphere (R~aut~) was calculated for each location as the difference between R~tot~ and R~het~.

CO~2~ efflux rates were measured using an infrared gas analyzer (LI-8100; Li-Cor, Lincoln NE USA) fitted with a 20-cm static chamber (Li-Cor 8100-103) that rested on top of the soil collar.
For each observation, the chamber was closed for two minutes while [CO~2~] was logged every second.
Linear regressions on static-chamber observations underestimate the initial flux rate [@Healy:1996it], so flux rates were computed in software by the LI-8100, which fit a saturating exponential curve of the form:
$$ C_t = C_{\infty} + (C_0 - C_{\infty}) e^{-a(t-t0)}; $$
where $C_0$ is [CO~2~] at the moment the chamber closed, $t$ is time, and $a$ and $C_{\infty}$ are fitted parameters representing curvature and [CO~2~] at the asymptote, respectively. Evaluating the derivative of $C_t$ at $t=0$ then gives the instantaneous initial slope $a(C_{\infty} - C_0)$, which was scaled by the volume of the soil chamber to give CO~2~ flux rate at the moment the chamber closed.

Using exponential rather than linear fits is especially important in a FACE setting, because it allows a further correction for initial chamber conditions:
Respiration was measured while fumigation was active. Pure CO~2~ is released from the upwind side of the ring and mixes to the target concentration as it is blown across the plot [@Miglietta:2001wm], meaning that in elevated-CO~2~ plots the flux chamber would sometimes close on a transient high-[CO~2~] air mass (up to 2000 ppm).
In these cases the CO~2~ concentration gradient from soil to chamber air, and thus the rate of diffusion across the soil surface, was small. This meant that for these readings the fitted flux rate ‘at the moment the chamber closed’ was much smaller than the true equilibrium rate.
We corrected this bias using a method recommended by Li-Cor Inc. that re-evaluates the previously fit [CO~2~] curve to find the equilibrium flux $a(C_{\infty} - C_{target})$, where $a$ and $C_{\infty}$ are taken from the previous curve fit and $C_{target}$ is the daily average [CO~2~] in that ring (585 PPM for fumigated rings, 370-400 PPM for unfumigated rings).

Soil temperatures were measured simultaneously with each respiration measurement using a thermocouple probe inserted to 5 cm depth. Soil volumetric water content was measured from 5 to 105 cm depth 2-3 times each week using a capacitance probe and is reported elsewhere [@Rosenthal:2014di; @RuizVera:2015bv].

Particulate organic matter (POM), which consists of fragmented but undecomposed plant matter and is used as a proxy for the abundance of labile soil C, was measured using a procedure modified from Marriott & Wander [-@Marriott:2006ck]. Briefly, air-dried soil was sieved to 2 mm and a 10-g sample was weighed into a 30-mL plastic bottle. The mouth of the bottle was covered with a 53-µm nylon mesh to retain POM and sand while allowing silt and clay particles to escape. The bottle was submerged in 5% sodium hexametaphosphate (HMP) and shaken for one hour, then the HMP and suspended fines <53 µm were removed, replaced with deionized water, and shaking was repeated until no further fine material was extracted. The remaining POM + sand was transferred to a pouch of 53-µm mesh, rinsed with DI water, dried at 30 °C, and weighed. Samples were then ground in a ball mill (Geno Grinder 2010; BT&C, Lebanon New Jersey, USA) and combusted to determine C content using an elemental analyzer (Costech ECS4010; Costech Analytical Technologies, Valencia, California, USA).

### Statistical analysis

Analysis of variance for soil respiration was performed in a complete-block design using CO~2~ as a whole-plot fixed effect and heat as a split-plot fixed effect nested within CO~2~. Blocks were treated as random, and autocorrelation within plots from repeated measurement through the season was estimated as a first-order autoregressive function. R~tot~, R~het~, and R~aut~ fluxes for each season were analyzed separately as mixed-effects linear models with repeated measures using the nlme and lsmeans packages in R 3.2.4 [@R324:2016; @Pinheiro:2016nlme; @Lenth:2016lsmeans].  The date of each survey event was included as a categorical variable to account for within-season changes. Although most of the temporal variation is likely to be driven by weather and crop growth phase, the Day effect was treated as a catchall term and no explicit temperature or moisture covariates were included in the model. Because repeated measurements within the same plot are pseudo-replicates, the three flux measurements from each plot were averaged, giving n=4 observations per treatment in each day. Because experiments with few replicates have low power to detect small differences, we set a significance threshold of p $\le$ 0.1 to minimize the chance of false negative conclusions [@Filion:2000id]. Full statistical output and data-processing scripts are available in the data package for this manuscript [@Black:2016gcbdryad].

### Modeling of soil respiration and soil organic carbon

Because a three-year heating experiment is likely too short to detect changes in SOC, we performed an *in silico* experiment using a process-based ecosystem model [DayCent; @Parton:1998p1616] to simulate the effects of a 100-year global change manipulation and better understand the long-term effects of elevated CO~2~ and temperature on soil carbon dynamics.
DayCent has been widely used to model soil C, N, P and S dynamics and trace gas fluxes. It has been particularly well-validated for crop and grassland systems, and is straightforward to modify for predicted future conditions, making it ideal for simulations of the future ecosystem effects of climate and/or land-use changes [@Davis:2010bf; @Hartman:2011hy; @Davis:2012cv]. DayCent model development has been closely tied to previous global change experiments and its input parameters are designed for easy calibration against experimentally measured responses [@Parton:2007p2111; @Frey:2013jo].

To predict the medium- and long-term effects of ongoing ecosystem warming and elevated CO~2~ on soil carbon cycling, we performed a three-part set of DayCent simulations to simulate the historic development of the SoyFACE site from native prairie into a maize-soy rotation, extended this simulation through the 21st century, then ran the model four times using all factorial combinations of elevated CO~2~ and heat.

To calibrate the size and turnover rates of soil C pools, the model was first run to equilibrium by simulating a native tallgrass prairie at pre-industrial [CO~2~] of 294 PPM. Each simulation lasted 3867 years and looped over a weather file made by randomly ordering the years of an 1889-2009 temperature and precipitation record for Urbana, Illinois [@Angel:2kdKOchX].
Vegetation for the spin-up period used prairie grass parameters provided by Hudiburg et al. [-@Hudiburg:2014gv], with autumn burning every 5th year and low-intensity grazing by bison (10% of foliage removed 3 times per growing season). Soil parameters were based on bulk densities and organic matter contents of undisturbed Illinois prairie remnants [@David:2009eu], and on physical properties of the Flanagan and Drummer soil series [@SoilSurveyStaff:FYApeneB]. To match the high-moisture conditions predominant in Central Illinois before the introduction of artificial drainage, a standing water table was simulated from January through May.
Soil organic matter turnover times were adjusted to produce steady-state (<1% change per decade in last 100 yr) SOM C and N of 10450 and 760 g m^-2^, respectively, in the top 20 cm (@fig:modsomtarg). These totals are comparable to those measured in tallgrass prairie remnants on deep, mesic soils throughout the Midwest [@Aref:1998we; @David:2009eu; @Kucharik:2006be; @Matamala:2008fz; @Jelinski:2009dy; @Brye:2009hg] and were achieved using turnover rates for the active, intermediate, and slow soil C pools of 11, 0.1, and 0.002 yr^-1^, giving residence times of 33 days, 10 years and 500 years, respectively.

Annual rows crops were simulated beginning in 1868, the year our site was first recorded as occupied by European settlers. To simulate the change from an untilled, seasonally wet prairie to a tile-drained, annually-tilled crop system, we ceased simulating a standing water table, increased the maximum decomposition rate of intermediate- and slow-turnover organic matter, and reduced leaching rates for N and OM (@tbl:modparams). Additionally, we reduced the rate of nonsymbiotic soil N fixation and the fraction of mineralized N lost to nitrification to better match conditions observed in row crop systems (@tbl:modparams). 
Site-specific parameters were based on soil conditions measured at the site [C. Black, unpublished data; J. Jastrow, unpublished data; @Moran:2010p4144; @Peralta:2008p4145],
soil moisture measured at the site [S. B. Gray, unpublished data; @Rosenthal:2014di; @RuizVera:2015bv],
and historical weather data from the Illinois State Water Survey [@Angel:2kdKOchX].
Atmospheric [CO~2~] was increased linearly to match the rise in industrial fossil fuel burning, from 294 ppm in 1868 to 370 ppm in 2000.
Crop-specific parameters for maize and soybeans were developed by Hudiburg et al. [-@Hudiburg:2014gv] to match the rate and physiological mechanisms of 20th-century crop genetic improvements: maize yield gains have come mostly from increases in planting density and photosynthetic capacity [@Duvick:2005gp], so we simulated an increase in the maximum daily biomass production rate, with minor adjustments to other parameters (@tbl:modmaize). In contrast, soybean yield increases have come mostly from improved yield partitioning at constant plant size [@Koester:2014do], so our soybean parameters were constant except that we increased the maximum harvest index in 1950 and 1980.

The management history of the site before 1980 was inferred from records of crop acreage and fertilizer usage for Champaign County retrieved from the  National Agricultural Statistics Service [@NASS:QndUZAD]. Site management since 1980 is well described [@Moran:2010p4144] and was simulated accordingly (-@tbl:modschedules). Briefly, management progressed from low-yielding mixed maize/oat/pasture in 1869 through increasingly intensive cropping and fertilization to a maize-soybean-oat rotation by 1935 and a maize-soybean rotation by 1950, with fertilization rates and cultivar parameters adjusted each decade to match NASS records.
Beginning in 1970 we changed cultivation from moldboard plow every spring and fall to chisel plowing each spring and in fall after maize only, and fertilization rates were held steady at 157 kg N Ha^-1^. This management schedule was continued though 1999, then concluded in 2000 with one year of winter wheat [@Moran:2010p4144].

To simulate the SoyFACE climate change manipulations, we extended the 20^th^-century simulation for the years 2001-2109 using the actual 2001-2011 planting and harvest dates of the SoyFACE experimental field. Weather data for 2001-2011 was retrieved from DAYMET [@Thornton:2014br] and the model was run four times:
a control run with actual weather conditions and [CO~2~] set to 370 ppm (ambient conditions at the initiation of the SoyFACE experiment), a CO~2~-only run with [CO~2~] increased by 200 ppm to 570 ppm as a step change in 2001, a heat-only run with daily maximum and minimum temperatures increased 3.5 °C as a step change in 2009, and a heat+CO~2~ run with both temperature and CO~2~ increased. Note that we did not simulate any further increase in [CO~2~] after the step change, so for all model-data comparisons we treated values modeled at 370 or 570 ppm as equivalent to field values observed in 2009-2011 at ~390 or 585 ppm.

Our model calibration strategy was to use the performance of our spin-up and historic hindcast scenarios as indicators of correct parameter calibration, then run the climate change scenarios with no further changes in model tuning. To the extent that model hindcasts do match known conditions, we gain confidence that model predictions for the future are reasonable. To evaluate model performance in more detail, we compared modeled soil temperature, moisture, and respiration rates against our 2009-2011 field observations. We also compared modeled aboveground biomass and grain yields for 2001-2008 against detailed phenological measurements from SoyFACE, using a database compiled by Twine et al [-@Twine:2013js]. All model parameters and analysis scripts are available online [Supplement 2.S1; @Black:2016gcbdryad].
