## Results

### Temperature and CO~2~ manipulation

Infrared heating produced a mean temperature increase of approximately 3.1, 2.7, and 2.6 °C at the top of the canopy in 2009, 2010, and 2011, respectively, and CO~2~ fumigation consistently maintained \~585 ppm CO~2~ during daylight hours [@RuizVera:2013we; @RuizVera:2015bv]. Soil temperature at 5-cm depth was increased by 1.8 $\pm$ 0.2 °C (mean $\pm$ standard error of daily differences) during the growing seasons (@fig:obssoilt). During fallow seasons, heater output was intermittently reduced during extreme cold snaps (less than 16% of total time) but soil temperature for the whole season was still increased by 2.3 $\pm$ 0.1 °C (@fig:obssoilt). There was no consistent difference in soil temperature between eCO~2~ and unfumigated plots given the same heat treatment.

### Soil respiration

Overall, heating caused a consistent and large increase in R~het~ but reduced R~aut~ by a similar degree, producing no appreciable net effect of heating on R~tot~, while eCO~2~ increased R~het~ and affected R~aut~ differently each year, with the net effect of a small stimulation in R~tot~ from eCO~2~.
Averaged across the entire experiment, R~het~ was higher than control by 16, 12, and 48% in the eCO~2~, heat, and heat+CO~2~ treatments, respectively. R~aut~ was slightly (3%) higher in eCO~2~ and lower in heated plots by 21% (heat) and 31% (heat+eCO~2~). R~tot~ was higher in eCO~2~ treatments by 11% (unheated eCO~2~) and 13% (heated eCO~2~) but 3% lower in the heated ambient CO~2~ treatment (@fig:obsrespmean).

Separate mixed-model analyses of respiration from each season (@tbl:obsrespstat) showed that
under soybeans in 2009, R~tot~ was unchanged while R~het~ increased and R~aut~ decreased in both heat and eCO~2~ treatments.
Under maize in 2010, CO~2~ increased R~tot~, heat increased R~het~, and there were no differences in R~aut~ between treatments.
Under soybeans in 2011, there were no differences in R~tot~ between treatments while R~het~ was higher and R~aut~ was lower in heated plots. R~het~ also showed a three-way interaction between Heat, CO~2~, and Day, with higher R~het~ from heated eCO~2~ plots on June 24 and July 18 but no statistical difference between treatments on the other days of the season (@fig:obsresp).
During the fallow period following soybeans (winter 2009-2010), R~aut~ and R~tot~ did not differ between treatments while R~het~ was higher in eCO~2~ plots and had an interactive effect with heat and day, with a trend (p < 0.12) for higher R~het~ from heated plots on October 7 and December 31, lower R~het~ from heated plots on December 10, and no statistical difference on the other days.
During the fallow period following maize (winter 2010-2011), no component of soil respiration (R~tot~, R~het~, R~aut~) differed between treatments. The main effect of Day was significant in all treatments every season, while the heat by CO~2~ and CO~2~ by Day interactions were never significant.


### Particulate organic matter

POM-C declined from the beginning to the end of the experiment (2009 > all other harvests; Tukey HSD p < 0.01; @fig:obspom) and was approximately 14% lower in eCO~2~ plots than in ambient plots (ANOVA F=7.69, p < 0.01; @fig:obspom), but showed no statistically resolvable difference between heated and unheated plots (ANOVA F=0.29, p > 0.5). Averaged across all treatments, the top 30 cm of soil contained 588 ± 41 g POM C m^-2^ (mean ± SE) in Spring 2009, 439 ± 21 in Spring 2010, 444 ± 25 in Spring 2011, and 457 ± 22 in Fall 2011.

### DayCent model

DayCent simulations of 20th-century grain yields of maize and soybeans agreed well with historic crop yields from Champaign County and captured about half of the observed year-to-year variation in yield (@fig:modmassnass & @fig:modmassnassboth; root-mean-square error = 82.6 g C m^-2^, RMSE/mean = 0.53). Modeled total C and N in soil organic matter at the end of the historic agriculture scenario were both very near the values measured at SoyFACE (@fig:modsomtarg).
During the 2001-2008 CO~2~ simulation, the temporal dynamics of modeled aboveground biomass within each season matched well with values observed at SoyFACE in those years (@fig:modmasstf).
Observed soybean grain yields at the site averaged 191 ± 30 g C m^-2^ in ambient plots and 212 ± 39 in eCO~2~ plots [@Twine:2013js]; modeled yields for the same years were 194 ± 65 and 254 ± 75 g C m^-2^, respectively.
Observed maize yields averaged 423 ± 15 g C m^-2^ in ambient plots and 412 ± 44 in eCO~2~ plots [@Leakey:2006tk; @Markelz:2011gj; @RuizVera:2015bv]; modeled yields for the same years were 432 ± 38 and 460 ± 22 g C m^-2^, respectively.

Modeled effects on soil temperatures were somewhat higher than the observed differences, with heated model runs 4.1 ± 0.6 °C (mean ± sd) warmer than unheated runs at 5-cm depth during the growing season, while observed differences were less than 2 °C.
Additionally, modeled soil temperature differences dropped to 3.5 °C before planting and after harvest, while observed differences were larger then than during the growing season (~2.5 °C; @fig:obssoilt).
Modeled temperatures in elevated CO~2~ model runs were 0.5 ± 0.4 °C lower than those in ambient runs, but no consistent differences were observed in the field (@fig:obssoilt).

Compared to the values observed in the field, DayCent captured the seasonal variation and relative timing in all components of soil respiration, matched its magnitude well for R~het~, and consistently underpredicted R~aut~, producing a smaller overall under prediction of R~tot~ (@fig:modresptf).

When the simulation was extended to 100 years of heating and elevated [CO~2~], DayCent predicted that CO~2~ would increase all soil C pools, producing an increase of about ~4% in total SOM C (@fig:modsomtf). In contrast, heating was predicted to produce a rapid drop in all pools that overwhelmed the increased C inputs from eCO~2~, producing a loss from heated runs, relative to the control scenario, of 15% of total soil C in the top 20 cm by 2109 (@fig:modsomtf).
