## Discussion

Experimental manipulation of CO~2~ and temperature conditions similar to those expected for the mid-21^st^ century increased respiration from soil microbes, likely indicating a drawdown of both labile and protected soil C. This effect would not have been detectable without partitioning respiration into its root and microbial components, and it was not offset by the observed positive effect of CO~2~ on plant productivity. Instead, CO~2~ increased respiration and reduced POM C, and we saw no evidence of interactions between heat and CO~2~ responses, leading us to speculate that eCO~2~ primed long-term losses of SOC. Our model results adequately captured the effects of temperature and the additive effect of the temperature and CO~2~ responses, but did not reproduce a CO~2~ priming effect, so actual soil C losses may exceed our model-predicted value of 15% in 100 years.

Our results support the prediction that elevated temperature would increase the activity of soil heterotrophs and that this increased respiration would lead to long-term losses of soil C. Three years of heating produced strong and persistent increases in R~het~ (@fig:obsrespmean; @tbl:obsrespstat) and our model results are consistent with these increases leading to losses of C from all soil pools (@fig:modsomtf).
Because heating reduced R~aut~ simultaneously with increasing R~het~, there was no change in total soil respiration with heat (@fig:obsrespmean; @tbl:obsrespstat).
This result contrasts with many previous studies [reviewed in @Rustad:2001kx; @Wang:2014gv] where R~tot~ increased under heating except under water limitation, but this discrepancy is explained by partitioning fluxes into their autotrophic and heterotrophic components.

Consistent with recent meta-analyses [@Dieleman:2012gm; @Wang:2014gv], we found that R~het~ responded reliably to increased temperature even when opposing changes in R~aut~ masked its effect on R~tot~. This highlights the importance of separating soil CO~2~ fluxes in global change experiments into their root and microbial components.
We speculate that this masking may also occur at other sites where R~tot~ was measured without partitioning and found unresponsive to heat, especially those in grasslands and crops where root activity seems less responsive to eCO~2~ than in forest systems [@Wang:2014gv].

Our results did not support the prediction that elevated CO~2~ would increase plant biomass above and belowground, leading to higher C inputs that would at least partially ameliorate the long-term effect of heat on soil C. Although aboveground plant biomass was higher in eCO~2~ plots during soybean years, heating largely negated this difference [@RuizVera:2013we] and there was little difference in root mass (S. B. Gray, in prep). R~het~ increased more in heat+eCO~2~ plots than in plots given heat alone, indicating increased respiratory losses. Meanwhile R~aut~, a probable correlate of C inputs from root exudation and turnover, was lower in eCO~2~ plots in 2009 and showed no detectable change in other years, and the change in R~aut~ between heat and heat+eCO~2~ plots was similar to that between unheated control and eCO~2~ plots. One possible explanation for these findings is that the extra C inputs from eCO~2~ were priming the breakdown of existing soil C, as seen previously at this and other FACE sites across widely differing ecosystem types [@Peralta:2008p4145; @Moran:2010p4144; @Carrillo:2011er; @Drake:2011p6358; @Fang:2014dp; @Hopkins:2014gm], rather than offsetting the effect of heat.

The priming hypothesis also is consistent with our observation that POM-C declined from 2009 to 2011 and was lower in eCO~2~ plots than in unfumigated plots (@fig:obspom). The lack of an increase in POM-C with eCO~2~ at this site was noted previously and attributed to priming by Peralta *et al.* [-@Peralta:2008p4145] after 3 years of fumigation, but it is worth noting that in year 3 the difference in POM-C between treatments was not yet significant. Given that the CO~2~ priming effect required most of a decade to become statistically resolvable, it is perhaps not surprising that 3 years of heating did not produce a detectable change in POM-C.

Compared to other experiments that have examined the simultaneous effects of heating and eCO~2~ on soil C dynamics, SoyFACE is notable for showing no obvious heat $\times$ CO~2~ interactions.
Although unheated FACE experiments have commonly showed direct effects of eCO~2~ on soil respiration [@Pendall:2003cz; @Pregitzer:2008bk; @Adair:2011bm; @Drake:2011p6358; @Lam:2014vz], many heat $\times$ CO~2~ experiments are dominated by indirect effects [@Dieleman:2012gm], which seem to be mediated by the joint effects of CO~2~ and heating on soil water availability [@Wan:2007p1673; @Pendall:2011fa; @Selsted:2012ih; @Pendall:2013fj].
Our site, by contrast, showed no significant heat $\times$ CO~2~ interactions, perhaps because the site is only rarely dry enough to limit respiration.
Water content was consistently higher in eCO~2~ plots and was lower in heated plots in 2009 and on some days in 2010, but volumetric water content never dropped below 20% and the differences in soil water were not significant in 2011, the driest summer of the study [@Rosenthal:2014di; @RuizVera:2015bv].
Thus the effects of water availability on R~het~ appear to be additive to the heat effect, not a driving mechanism.

The observed changes in R~aut~ may be caused by differences in root distribution. We have no evidence of changes in total root biomass,
however minirhizotron observations from maize in 2010 suggest that elevated CO~2~ affected the depth distribution of roots, with greater root length in shallow soils and lower root length in deeper soils, but the effects depended on temperature treatment (S. B. Gray, in prep).
In 2009 soybeans in heated plots appeared to use deeper soil water [@Rosenthal:2014di], possibly indicating a shift of roots toward deeper soil that would have reduced the amount of root-respired C reaching the surface, thus contributing to the reduction in R~aut~ from soybeans we observed that year.

The empirical results from this study are reinforced by forward extrapolations from a process based model which indicates that heat, either singly or combined with increased CO~2~, will drive long-term losses in SOC from agricultural soils, adding to losses in SOC caused by aggressive tillage practices.
This result is consistent with previous models of CO~2~ $\times$ warming experiments in predicting a net loss of soil C under global warming [@Parton:2007p2111].

Given the difficulty of inferring SOC changes from short-term direct measurements and the number of known processes that DayCent integrates, we posit that these model results provide our best available prediction of the *direction* of future SOC trajectories in a warming climate, and that that they place a lower bound on the *magnitude* of future losses as CO~2~ increases.
However, our modelling approach was unable to test the hypothesis of a priming effect of eCO~2~ on soil C breakdown, because DayCent's SOC model has an explicitly specified turnover time for each pool. Turnover can be manually increased to simulate priming [@Cheng:2013hs], but this requires a known degree of increase.
Our observation that POM-C declined under elevated CO~2~ gives an indirect indication that turnover rates have increased, but is not sufficient to constrain the magnitude of the increase, especially in slower-cycling C pools. 
Instead, increasing model C inputs through CO~2~ fertilization lead to an increase in modeled SOM with no decrease in fast C pools that would match our observed drop in POM-C. Therefore our model results probably understate the extent of soil C losses under elevated CO~2~.
To produce more accurate long-term predictions of SOC dynamics under systems with active priming, models with explicit microbial processes may be needed [@Wieder:2013gb].

Elevated CO~2~ and temperature, both singly and in combination, appear to accelerate the loss of soil C from agricultural ecosystems, through probably distinct and potentially additive pathways. Simple measurements of whole-soil respiration were not sufficient to detect these changes, so future experimental work should routinely include partitioning of soil respiration into plant-derived and SOM-derived components. Robust predictions of CO~2~ priming effects will require updated ecosystem models that contain explicit microbial dynamics.

