
## Discussion

In repeated observations of four crop systems, we observed much more root both by mass and by volume in perennial grasses than in annual maize-soybean. The root systems of the perennials continued expanding across five years of observations, appeared resilient to a major drought, and allocated large quantities of carbon to the deep subsoil. By explicitly correcting for depth-dependent detection biases, we found good agreement between minirhizotron and core-based measurements of root mass, which may allow nondestructive monitoring of root structure and C stocks in familiar units. The combination of greatly increased root mass and allocation deep in the soil suggest that conversion from row cropping to perennial grass biofuels could result in large-scale soil C increases.

Our measured root masses agree well with previous work that shows much larger root systems in perennial grasses than in annual crops, and that root mass stays high even during the spring and fall when annual fields are fallow. We observed switchgrass root masses comparable to those from other stands of similar age that were sampled to a depth of ≥90 m [@Frank:2004hr; @Monti:2009do; @Collins:2010bv; @GartenJr:2010bz; @Dohleman:2012cd] and higher than those sampled to shallower depths [@Bransby:1998jk]. *Miscanthus* root masses were comparable but generally at the high end of totals seen in other studies [@Neukirchen:1999ub; @Beuch:2000gx; @Christian:2006kk; @Monti:2009do; @Amougou:2011hw; @Dohleman:2012cd] and the values reported by other studies are highly correlated with sampling depth. *Miscanthus* rhizome mass, by contrast, was comparable but generally at the low end of totals seen in other studies, comparable to previous work on crops of similar ages [@Beuch:2000gx; @Christian:2006kk; @Amougou:2011hw; @Dohleman:2012cd]. Taken together, this suggests that *Miscanthus* invested especially heavily in roots over rhizomes at our highly fertile, deep-soil site. The minirhizotron method never detected rhizomes, so all image-based results should be considered to show root volume only.

We expected that root development would approximately parallel aboveground stand development, with belowground biomass nearing steady state in year 3-4. Instead, perennials explored the whole soil profile very early in development (we detected roots beyond 126 cm even in the first imaging sessions) but their root volume continued to increase through the whole period of the study even after each crop reached maximum aboveground biomass [2010-2012; @Joo:2016dd]. This increase was especially evident in the prairie treatment, which consistently had the lowest aboveground productivity among our four crop systems [@AndersonTeixeira:2013bx] but reached 608±89 g root m^-2^ by 2011 and 1924±306 g root m^-2^ by 2014 (@Fig:coremass), making the root mass of this prairie comparable to 20-year-old restorations in its fourth year and, remarkably, comparable in its seventh year to undisturbed native prairie remnants [@Kucharik:2006be; @Matamala:2008fz; @Jelinski:2011du].

During the unusually hot and dry summer of 2012, both *Miscanthus* and switchgrass maintained essentially the same root volume and depth distribution as other years, while maize and prairie shifted from shallower to deeper roots as the season progressed. This may reflect a difference in ecological drought resilience strategies, with both *Miscanthus* and switchgrass apparently able to access deep soil water and maintain growth through the drought. Although measurements of net ecosystem exchange suggest that our *Miscanthus* may have suffered some delayed consequences of 2012 drought stress in the form of reduced 2013 productivity [@Joo:2016dd], we saw no negative effects on root volume. 
By contrast, Mann et al [-@Mann:2012hq] reported very shallow root systems and severe biomass reductions from young *Miscanthus* grown in water-limited mesocosms while young switchgrass explored deep soil whether irrigated or water-limited. The difference between these results and ours may indicate that mature, established deep roots are crucial to *Miscanthus* drought resistance.
It is probable that the shift in prairie root distribution came from changes in relative dominance of species with different rooting habits rather than from individual species reallocating mass within the soil profile, but this is speculative because the minirhizotron images do not allow us to distinguish among roots of different species. Furthermore, the presence of deep roots from a particular species is not necessarily sufficient for effective access to deep soil water [@Nippert:2012fd].

By modeling the root distribution as a log-linear function of depth and explicitly estimating two forms of detection noise (zeroes from small samples and bias from the surface underdetection effect), we gained sensitivity to detect changes in root volume that would have been invisible in a conventional minirhizotron analysis of root length density. However, this method has some limitations. It requires a large sample size (probably at least 15-20 tubes per treatment) to achieve reasonable precision, especially for the underdetection parameter estimates. In particular, estimates of the surface underdetection factor are positively correlated with model slope, so the model requires enough data from deep soil (where the underdetection factor is zero) to accurately separate these effects. In our data this was especially visible early in 2012, when few maize roots were present below the surface layers and therefore the model predicted unrealistically high maize root density in the surface layers (@Fig:stan2012). 

Previous work on the underdetection of near-surface roots by minirhizotron images has usually concluded that the underdetection is similar across species [@Ephrath:1999vq]. Our model differs by estimating the correction separately for each crop; we tested an alternate model with a common correction factor, but found that it fit poorly and frequently overestimated near-surface root volume in maize and soybean. It is possible that this difference can be explained as a difference in time since tube installation: We re-installed the minirhizotron tubes in maize-soybean each year but left the perennial tubes in place. Consistent with this hypothesis, we note that the estimated correction factor differed more between maize-soybean and perennials than it did among perennials, but we cannot test for time effects in more detail because installation time and crop are confounded in our experimental design.

We also emphasize that our conversion from root volume to mass (@Fig:stanvscore) is based solely on mean root tissue densities from the literature; it assumes constant tissue density across depth, root age and size class, and plant development stage. This assumption was necessary because few depth- and time-resolved reports of tissue density are available. Indeed, what evidence we do have suggests variation in tissue density across all of these factors [@Craine:2003ht; @Bernier:2005dk; @Monti:2009do; @DeVries:2016em]. The precision of rhizotron-based root mass estimates could likely be improved by incorporating more specific tissue density conversions when they are available.

Overall we found that perennial biofuel grasses consistently had many more roots than maize and soybean at every depth, and the deep soil layers (> 50 cm) contained more perennial roots than were present in the entire soil profile under maize or soybean. This deep rooting appears to be important for resilience to summer drought, and is also a large flux of carbon into stable, rarely disturbed soil. Consistent with strongly negative net ecosystem carbon balance for perennial crops compared to positive values for maize-soybean rotation [@Zeri:2011er], we therefore speculate that the conversion from row crops to perennial biofuel grasses may result in large and persistent increases in soil C storage.
