
## Results

### Soil core samples 

Perennials produced far more root biomass than maize, and the difference became larger as the perennials matured (@Fig:coremass). The belowground biomass of the perennial grasses in core samples increased dramatically from 2011 to 2014 (F~1,28~ > 66; p << 0.01), from 5-8 times greater than maize in 2011 whether measured as roots or as total biomass [@AndersonTeixeira:2013bx] to 8-11 (root alone) or 11-16 (root+rhizome) times greater than maize in 2014 (@Fig:coremass; all Tukey t~28~ > 7;  all p << 0.01).
When we considered roots alone there was an interaction between year and crop, with increases for *Miscanthus* and prairie (both more than tripled from 2011 to 2014; t~28~ > 5.5, p << 0.01) but not for maize or switchgrass (root mass was greater by 62% and 76% respectively, but the difference was not significant after correcting for multiple comparisons; t~28~ < 2.8; p > 0.15). When we considered total root+rhizome biomass, the year-over-year changes were similar in magnitude to those for roots alone, but the variability was greater and the year by crop interaction was not significant (F~3,28~=2.2; p > 0.1).

There were no statistically resolvable differences in belowground biomass among perennials in either year (all Tukey t~28~ < 1.6; p > 0.4), but the rank order of total mass depended on the year and the pool measured because of increases in rhizome mass. In 2011 switchgrass had the greatest mass (860±126 g root m^-2^, no rhizomes detected) and *Miscanthus* was second for total biomass (819±130 g root+rhizome m^-2^) but third for roots alone (535±79 g root m^-2^), while in 2014 prairie had the greatest root mass (1924±282 g root m^-2^) but *Miscanthus* had the greatest total mass (2793±444 g root m^-2^). For comparison, maize root mass was 109±17 (2011) and 177±26  (2014) g root m^-2^ (@Fig:coremass).

Biomass in core samples declined approximately log-linearly with depth (@Fig:coreprofile), but the distribution of biomass through the soil profile varied by species (F~3,180~ = 8.69, p << 0.01). Prairie roots were more concentrated near the surface and declined more quickly with depth than *Miscanthus* or maize (t~180~ > 3.5; p < 0.01). The decline in switchgrass was intermediate between prairie and maize and not significantly different from either one (all t~180~ < 2.6; p > 0.05), although the comparison with prairie was marginal in 2014 (t~180~ = 2.59; p = 0.0501), and switchgrass declined more quickly than *Miscanthus* in 2011 (t~180~ = 3.50; p < 0.01) but not in 2014 (t~180~ = 1.02, p = 0.69).
When we modeled total root+rhizome biomass instead of roots alone, the slope by year interaction became significant (F~1,180~ = 4.99, p < 0.05), with the mass of all crops declining more with depth in 2014 than in 2011. With rhizome mass included there were no statistically resolvable differences in slope among perennials in either year, but *Miscanthus* and switchgrass changed from similar to maize in 2011 (t~180~ < 1.9; p > 0.2) to greater declines in 2014 (t~180~ > 2.9, p < 0.02) because of dramatic increases in rhizome biomass near the surface.

Despite the observation that root biomass for maize was more evenly distributed through the soil profile (less negative slope terms) than the perennial crops, the root mass of perennials at any given depth was greater than that of maize even at the bottom of the soil profile (@Fig:coremass). Perennials had 2-17 times more root biomass than maize (post-hoc contrasts on fitted LS means; t~180~ > 3; p << 0.01) all the way to 128 cm, the mean maximum depth of our core samples, with the exception that in 2011 the difference between prairie and maize was marginal at depths greater than 1 m (t~180~ < 2.6; 0.05 < p < 0.1).

### Minirhizotron images: model evaluation

The Bayesian model of root distribution compensated well for poor surface root detection by the minirhizotron, explained ~30% of the total variance in log root volume, and showed little bias: 90% prediction intervals for individual images included the observed value 90% of the time, and 50% intervals about 50% of the time, indicating that both the mean and variance components were consistent with the data (@Fig:muobsregress). 

Much of the remaining ~70% of variation is attributable to the inherent variability among source images and could be reduced by aggregating multiple images before testing model fit, but this is prevented by the model structure. After incorporating detection and surface effects, model predictions are in units of expected *corrected* root volume and their means can no longer be compared directly against the observed means of raw images, meaning the direct comparison of observed vs. predicted values is only valid at the level of individual images. Although the model structure prevents a quantitative comparison, qualitatively the shape of the depth function and the ranking of species differences agreed well with the patterns seen in soil cores (@Fig:stanpeak), and did not show the reduction in near-surface root volume observed in the raw images. The model treated the variance from individual minirhizotron tubes $\sigma^\textrm{tube}$ and the detection probability parameters $a^\textrm{detect}$ and $b^\textrm{detect}$ as identical across crops, while the intercept, slope, surface underdetection parameters $\alpha^\textrm{surface}$ and $\beta^\textrm{surface}$, and residual variance $\sigma$, were fit separately for each crop. Half-detection depths ($\alpha^\textrm{surface}$; the estimated depth where the surface underdetection effect reduces to observations 50% of true root volume) ranged from 1 to 36 cm in maize, 14-35 in *Miscanthus*, 9-24 in switchgrass, and 11-26 in prairie, and tended to be greatest in midseason. We also attempted to fit an alternate model with $\alpha^\textrm{surface}$ and $\beta^\textrm{surface}$ identical across all crops, but encountered numerical difficulties and lack of sampler convergence that suggested a very poor model fit (data not shown).

Although the model predicts root *volume* per area of image rather than root mass directly, predicted root volume for midsummer 2011 and 2014 scaled positively and log-linearly against simultaneously collected root masses from coring (@Fig:stanvscore) and overlapped with the values expected from a simple conversion based on previous research. If root volume per image area = (root mass)(depth of view)/(root tissue density), the dashed lines in @Fig:stanvscore show the root volume expected from core mass assuming 0.78 mm depth of view [@Taylor:2013kg] and root tissue densities of 0.08 g cm^-3^ for maize [@Pahlavanian:1988hp], 0.20 for *Miscanthus* [@Wahl:2000hu; @PiconCochard:2011bf; @Roumet:2006bl], 0.19 for switchgrass [@Craine:2001jy] and 0.15 for prairie [@Craine:2001jy]. With the exceptions of maize (0%) and *Miscanthus* (45%) in 2011, model predictions accounted for at least 75% of the variation in block means of root mass from cores (@Fig:stanvscore).

### Minirhizotron images: changes in root distribution through time

Across the five years of the experiment, all three perennials increased their root volume (95% intervals for 2010 and 2014 model intercepts did not overlap; @Fig:paramci), while maize and soybean did not (95% intervals overlapped; @Fig:paramci), even though both annuals and perennials had the numerically lowest midsummer root volume in 2010 and the highest in 2014 (@Fig:stanpeak).

The distribution of root volume with depth showed little change over time. Prairie roots were more concentrated near the surface in 2014 than in either 2011 or 2012 (slope term was more negative; 95% intervals do not overlap; @Fig:paramci) but no other crop showing detectable changes from year to year. Intriguingly, though, maize, *Miscanthus*, and prairie all showed their most even distribution and widest uncertainty intervals in 2012, a very hot drought year. This change can be seen in the predicted depth profiles as a reduction in near-surface root volume in maize, *Miscanthus*, and prairie, but no apparent change was seen in switchgrass (@Fig:stanpeak).

When we followed root volume from month to month within individual growing seasons, the perennials showed strong seasonal changes in 2010 but did not change from month to month in 2012. 
In 2010 root volume under all four crops was higher in August than either May or October (95% intervals for intercept term do not overlap; @Fig:paramci). In soybean the distribution of roots in the soil also changed, with root volume strongly decreasing with depth in June and July but essentially vertical from midsummer through senescence (@Fig:stan2010; slope interval overlapped zero in August and October; @Fig:paramci). In contrast, root volume in the perennial crops rose from June through August and dropped again in October, but the depth distribution did not change substantially except in *Miscanthus*, where roots were more concentrated near the surface in July than in August (@Fig:stan2010; @Fig:paramci). 
In 2012, maize root volume increased from May through August (@Fig:paramci), but shifted its distribution dramatically from roots concentrated very near the surface in the first three observations to evenly distributed across depths in August (@Fig:stan2012). The 2012 maize crop senesced in August because of drought and was harvested in September, so no images were collected from maize in October. All three perennials, by contrast, were consistent in both total root volume and in depth distribution throughout the season. All three appeared to slightly reduce near-surface root volume late in the season (@Fig:stan2012), but these changes were not statistically resolvable except in prairie, where roots were concentrated nearer the surface in May than in either early August or October (@Fig:paramci).
